Hi everyone, I'm Jen Hecht, and I'm the DP of People Operations at RStudio, and I'm thrilled
to be on the stage today with some folks who are going to help us talk about building a
career in data science, in particular around the use of R, but not exclusively R. So let
me just introduce the panelists that we have today. Sitting right next to me, we have Sadiqa
Watson. She's the founder at Corolasi Data Insights, and also senior data scientist at
Elicit Insights. We have David Kyes, who's the founder of R for the Rest of Us, and we
also have Gabby DeQuiros, senior engineering and data science manager at IBM, and also
founder at AI Inclusive and RLADYS. So welcome. Yeah, very cool. So I thought we'd get started
by asking each of you to talk a little bit about your own experiences sort of growing
your career in data science. You know, we've heard, I think, a few panelists today or speakers
today talk about, you know, what is it to be a data scientist? I just heard a talk about
salary structures, and I think it's a topic that's relevant for a lot of people in different
ways. I'm interested in hearing a little bit about, you know, how did each of you experience
milestones in your data science career? Or perhaps if you're a team manager or somebody
working with people that are learning as data science, how do you think about, like, what
are the stages of this, and how have you moved through them?
All right, we have a... Hello? Can you hear Gabby?
All right. All right. This one is working. Cool. So let me just, like, summarize kind
of, like, my career path, because it's interesting and different from all of us here. So I was
in academia for about five years doing research with air pollution data. So then I moved to
the industry. So I had this transition point where I'm like, I want to try something else.
I want to go to work for a company. So then I became a data scientist. So I was a statistician
before doing research, and then I became a data scientist. Also I moved to San Francisco.
So statisticians in San Francisco, they all became data scientists. So I was first working
for a startup, and then doing some kind of, like, consulting. And then I moved to a different
startup, and then became a lead data scientist, and then moved again, senior data scientist,
moved again, became a developer advocate, and then I got to a point, an opportunity
to become a manager. So it's kind of, like, I don't know, like, exactly what I, like,
you know, you wait two years, and then you did this. It's kind of, like, it's when I
felt ready. And I think becoming a manager was a big jump from all the other transitions
that I had to go through. So I felt, like, I think I'm ready to become a manager. Let's
see how it goes.
Yeah. Okay. Great.
Hi. So my path into data science definitely has not been linear, particularly because
my motivations, my just thoughts about who I was, and what I wanted to become, and the
types of things I wanted to do, they changed. So, for example, when I was in high school,
I thought, I love math. The people that I see around me in high school are my math teachers.
They love math, and they became math teachers, and so I'll be a math teacher, you know. So
and then at some point, I discovered that there were some other things beyond education
that you could do with math, and heard about being a math professor, you know, and then
found out about biostatistics after I became interested in that type of career. So I ended
up becoming a biostatistics researcher, and then, you know, as other people have drank
that same data science Kool-Aid, heard about all of the cool projects and the great salary
structures associated with data science, and decided that that was something that I wanted
to do. So some of it was just exposure, where people told me about other different types
of paths that I might not have thought about, and some of it was just also just restlessness,
change in interest. Maybe I was really happy with my career as a biostatistician for the
most part. Nobody had a, I didn't have a problem with my co-workers or the work, but it was
just, I kind of want to see what else is out there, you know, and I keep hearing about
this other thing, so let me just try that.
Can you hear me? Yeah. So first of all, I should say, I think my current work, as well
as my path, is pretty different from the other folks on this stage. Unlike them, I work for
myself. My business, as Jen mentioned, is R for the rest of us, and I primarily focus
on training folks to use R. And I particularly focus, I think of it as kind of like people
who are scared about R but want to learn it. That's kind of my niche. And how I got into
it, I think I, it's very much by accident, which I know is a story that resonates with
a lot of folks here. I'm actually trained, I'm not very quantitatively trained. I have
a PhD in anthropology. My dissertation was entirely qualitative. Worked on some mixed
methods projects, kind of butted, or not butted up against, but came in contact with some
folks who were using R but never actually used R in grad school. And it was actually
only when I started doing some consulting work where I was doing what's called program
evaluation work, looking at kind of applied social science research, looking at the impact
of programs run by non-profits, that type of thing. And the organization I was working
for allowed me to use whatever software I wanted to, so I taught myself R. And basically
since then I realized that there was a need for other people in that industry as well
as others to learn R. And so I have kind of made that my thing. But now I forgot what
your original question was, so if you want to...
Well, we're free to divert from my original question, but I think, and that's... It's
been interesting to hear all the stories. I think one theme is that it's non-linear.
It's not like there's a set of predefined steps or ladder, or you've got to do this
before you move on to the next thing. You hit on something, though, when you were talking
about having to teach yourself and not feeling like you were already part of a community
that was very quantitative in nature. And I think that's another question I had for
all of you. How did you build that kind of community, whether you were in industry when
you were learning or you were coming out of academia, kind of go out and find it for yourself?
I know all of you in your own ways have been involved in trying to bring other people through
that journey, but can you talk a little bit about how you started to find that for yourself
and how that evolved? Yeah, so I didn't have this community before back in Brazil, so when
I moved over here and created Our Ladies, that was one of the intentions. It's like,
I don't have a community, so I'm going to create it. So that's how it worked for me.
So I could answer this question in two different ways according to the period of my life.
That it relates to. So in the earlier periods, of course, where I'm new to the different
types of mathematical concepts and different statistical, I guess I didn't mention this
before, so my background is in math and statistics. So I have a bachelor's in math, a master's
in math, a master's in statistics, and a PhD in statistics, and no student loans. Yay.
And so all of those different types of educational experiences put me into different types of
environments where I've got a particular mix of students, a particular set of faculty who
are trying to, you know, together help me to learn what I need to learn from whatever
that perspective is. And so in some sense, that community was curated for me just because
of where I was in school. But one thing that I've noticed as a professional is that you
don't always have the benefit of having those readily made communities. Sometimes you just
have to either create your own community, as our esteemed panelists did for R-Ladies.
I'm also an R-Ladies Dallas chapter organizer as well. So definitely understand the value
of those. But sometimes you have to be just very comfortable being a community of size one,
right? And especially in places where maybe you're the only one who cares about data or
you're the only one who cares about R or whatever this new model or tool is or whatever, where
you're either internally motivated and you're just reading and going online, looking at blogs
or, you know, different types of user groups, or you're also just going out, finding meetup groups,
finding different types of organizations, just to connect with people who have similar interests
to you. So I think it helps to develop yourself internally and also externally.
And for me, I think the answer is actually pretty straightforward. Online communities,
and particularly Twitter, have been really fundamental in terms of my learning of R.
I mean, I can say without reservation that I've learned more about R from Twitter than any other
single source. But also finding a community and building connections with folks. I mean,
I've met so many folks here who I have known through Twitter. And I've only used R for three
years. You know, only really kind of got more involved with this community in the last couple
years. The major benefit, if you're not already aware, of the Twitter community and the R community
in general is that it's extremely welcoming. And so I know I felt coming into it like I'm
an anthropologist. I'm not, you know, I don't have much quantitative background. Am I going to be
accepted? And I have found I've never not felt accepted. I think because there's such a diversity
of the things that people do with R, everyone, and a number of other reasons, including strongly
the work of R ladies, have made the R community extremely welcoming. And so I think putting
yourself out there in that community, even when you feel like, you know, who am I to try and have
anything to say about, you know, the world of R when there's so many people doing so many amazing
things. It is such a welcoming community. And it is really possible to find a place in it.
That's great. I'm smiling because I've had so many conversations with people here. And I think
almost everyone feels that way. You know, one of the great things about coming to the conference
is you get to hear amazing presentations from people doing cool things. But I think the dark
side is people may be wandering around going, oh, I'm the one that doesn't fit. So I have one other
prepared question. And before I ask it, I want to just let people know you can ask questions for
our panelists on Slido. I think this is probably pretty routine for folks now. We're in track one,
and the code is hexagon. So this is a pretty general question. But let's make a broad assumption
that a lot of people in the room are maybe in the earlier stages of their data science career.
If you had like a few minutes to spend with them and give them advice about how to grow that in
in the best way possible, what advice would you share with people?
So I can start. So my background, I mentioned that I actually went to school for statistics and
actually went into a biostats career. And that was before I even knew what data science was. So
when I learned what it was, I realized, especially as I started looking through some of the different
job opportunities, that they would ask for this long list of skills. And it was very intimidating.
We need a person who knows this, and they know this and know this. And it was just, how can I
get that expertise so that I can just get my foot in the door into this first role?
And so that would be one thing that I would advise you to think about is to just not be
overwhelmed. Just think about some of the key principles, I guess, that I would say are
fundamental to data science. And I could list it out as a bulleted list if you want to write them
down. I would say that there are three key areas of data science that you'd want to have some
proficiency in. One would be, there's obviously the mathematical component. So there's where
your machine learning or maybe even your deep learning, your clustering algorithms, all those
kinds of different algorithms, even logistic regression, ordinary least squares regression,
basic data analysis. Those types of areas are very important to get some proficiency in.
The next would be programming. So obviously having proficiency in something like R or Python,
some type of general use language such as one of those is ideal. Not just understanding specifics
of how to use this package in that module, but knowing how to program, right? How to be a
programmer. How to actually do the loops and if then statements and actually put together some
piece of code that accomplishes some task. So that would be the second thing. And the third,
I would say, would be the big data technologies. So some of you might be familiar with SQL or Hadoop,
Spark, Hive, things in that ecosystem. So having some familiarity, at least on the surface level
in each of those three areas and then developing those more and more over time as you get into
whichever specific role and you learn the specific needs of that role. I think that would be a good
place for you to start. Thank you. Yeah. I agree with like the job descriptions and all that,
but I think if you are a beginner, even like big data, like some companies they are not there yet
and they are still on the Excel spreadsheet, CSV files. So like if big data is like a big thing,
like you are not there yet, don't worry because I still think there are some, several companies
that are still doing small data, working with small data. But yeah, the job description is like
don't even bother to learn all the technologies because like there is no way. Like I have no idea
like how people know all that. That's the unicorn, right? So like the companies, they want the unicorn
and you as a data scientist, you don't have to know everything because if they are looking for
the unicorn and you are the unicorn, you are probably not going to work for that company.
You are going to be working for a different company either. So if you are trying to get into
data science, I would say, you know, apply for jobs. You are going to feel that you are not ready
and that's the feeling that you are going to have forever. You are never ready, right? So just
apply, apply, apply, apply and try to get a sense of like how the interview processes are because
they vary so much. Like some companies are going to be asking questions around probability. Other
companies are going to ask you questions more like general, like just to get your thinking,
you know, how you think about the problems. So I just would say if you are looking for a job, just
apply. Don't wait because you will never be ready. So my answer will be very much tailored to my work
which is basically as a consultant. I think I would offer two pieces of advice. One is to try
and find a niche if you are thinking about trying to do some consulting. I mean the advantage or one
of the major advantages of R is that it is multifaceted, right? You can do so many different
things with R. And as an R user, you know that and you get very excited. I think I found with
the consultants or as a consultant working with folks, it can be overwhelming to come in because
I do training and then I also sometimes actually will do some work for folks. You know, I will get
really excited and I will say, well, we can do this in R and that in R and this in, you know,
these 10 other things. And that can be overwhelming for folks. And so I think really
kind of like trying to focus on what you can particularly offer to a client if you are thinking
about doing some consulting. So for example, I focus when I'm not training, I mostly do data
visualization because that's an area that I'm pretty strong in. So having that niche I think
is important. I totally blanked on what my other thing was. I will come back to it if I remember.
Okay. Cool. I'll just add that in my experience working in HR, most job descriptions are
terrible. Honestly. Especially in data science, you know, half the things on there, there's no
human that could possibly do it. So you shouldn't let that get in your head. I'll just add that.
Okay. So with your permission, panel, I'm going to go to some questions from our folks out here.
First one is, has 30 people asking this question. I'm trying to decide whether to maintain a
technical role or try to shift into management and decision making. Any tips on what to do if
I want to do both? Yeah. That's a struggle that I go through. And before becoming a manager was
the thing that I was most afraid of is like, am I going to be in this sea of bureaucracy and then
I'll lose all my technical skills that I worked so hard for several years. I was not sure. So I
talked to a few folks in the company, especially the company that I work for, asking them, you know,
how was your path? And then how do you feel about keeping up with the technical piece as well?
So in large corporations, in particular, you can kind of like, you don't have to go one way or the
other. You can kind of go in the middle and you can also like always go back and forth. So you can
become a manager and go through the management track, but you can also come back to the technical
track for a few years and then come back again to the management track. So that's the beauty of like
some companies where you can go back and forth. So you keep developing. The other thing is try to,
you know, get some time for you. Like, let's say on Fridays, I try to schedule no meetings and then
I go to a corner in the room in the office and then I put my headphone on and then I just do
some coding or code review. So that's my strategy to keep me happy because there is a piece of me
that I miss if I'm not doing like technical work. Yeah. I've definitely been, I've had that same fear
actually. So I was actually kind of interested to hear what other people had to say about this
because I've been invited to go into management and, you know, into director level roles,
but I like having my hands on the data. I like having my finger on the pulse of all the different
types of cool tools and strategies that are out there. And so I don't want to lose that. So part
of me is nervous. So I haven't made that jump, but I would say that something that I really like
those tips, doing things that help you to continue to work those muscles. So I know some people who
actively had to go on hacker rank every day and do some coding exercises in the morning or,
you know, actually participate in code reviews and so on. So I would imagine that would be a
really good strategy. Yeah. Just one thing that I was thinking now. So if there is anything that
I need to measure, like, let's say I need to measure something on my team and then I'm like,
yes, I have some, you know, time for me to create R Shiny where I'm going to measure something.
So I try to translate tasks that I need to do in a coding exercise so I keep up with my coding.
Yeah, we can talk, like, it's a big jump. It's a big jump for sure. It's so different. But also,
you are developing other pieces of your brain, your skills that is going to help you also in
the future as a coder, a programmer. So another example that I was thinking is one day I had to
write something and then it came, like, things were coming through my mind. And I'm like, okay,
I didn't forget those things. And then I became a better searcher or, like, I don't know how to
say that. But, like, I can now search even better because there is some piece of my brain that got
developed a little bit better. So I know exactly how to look for answers where before I would
struggle much more. So I don't know. It's, yeah, it's something interesting, I think. And if you
have the ability to, you know, I want to become a manager. I'm going to give, like, a time. I'm
going to time box this for two years. I'm going to try it out for two years. If I don't like it,
can I go back? Yeah. That's great. And David, from what you were sharing before,
you have your hands in doing direct work as a consultant in data visualization and your
teaching. So you've been able to combine those a bit as well. And if you work for yourself,
you get to do both. Yeah. Better or worse. Yeah. That's great. Okay. Another very popular
question up here is, can you talk about salary negotiations? Any tips?
Okay. I'll start. So, all right. So I'll start with a story. Something that actually happened.
So I was a contractor working at a company along with a friend, a male colleague who was also a
contractor. And he ended up deciding to go into another company. And as they were negotiating his
salary, they asked him, you know, how much are you currently making? Right? Which, of course,
is the trap. Right? Because the next company wants to just kind of keep you around where you are and
maybe give you a little bit more. Right? And that is the trap question that keeps the income
inequality for men versus women so prevalent. But he got that question. And so he gave a very
creatively high answer. Right? Which I don't necessarily recommend. But I think he said
something like, I'm currently making $200,000. And he wasn't making $200,000. He said, I'm
currently making $200,000. And so the response was, oh, there's no way in the world I can pay
you $200,000. The best I could do is $175,000. Is that okay? Right? Which to me, I would have
never even dreamed of, you know, giving some sort of number that high. Because I think a lot of times
we don't value ourselves to be that. I'm not worth $175,000. You might be saying that to yourself.
Well, maybe I'll give them a lower number. Or I don't want them to think that I'm just too greedy
or something like that. So I think what helps in those types of situations would be to first of
all, understand the market. Right? Understand what a reasonable amount of money would be for
that particular role for your area. Like geographic area. And also for your specialty. And for your
years of experience. And the worst that they could do is say no. Right? I mean, you give them a
reasonable number that is in line with a salary that you can justify. The worst they could say
is no. It's a little bit lower. But I definitely just encourage you to, like I said, just think a
little bit more outside of the box. And, you know, value yourselves, I guess, maybe higher than
potential. Because they obviously have a vested interest in keeping your salary as low as possible.
They just want you in the door in the cheapest way possible. So, yeah. I highly encourage you
to actually negotiate your salary. You raise a great point about the prior salary. That's
actually illegal. I know it is in Massachusetts now to ask that question in an interview. I don't
know how many other states have gone there. But that's the reason why. Is that it automatically
kind of drags people down. Especially those who are unwilling to get creative in their ask.
One thing that I kind of learned to do is to have a network of people that I have some kind of,
like, open space or open conversation where I can ask the questions. You know, I can say I'm
looking for a job. I have this amount of years of experience. And how much do you think I should ask
for? And they say, oh, you know, I'm a senior person. I know that my company is paying around
this. So, I kind of, like, did a survey with, like, my friends or, like, the people that I know
and ask them what is the average or the interval that you think I should be asking for. The other
good thing and tip is if you have any friend that is manager or hiring manager, ask them. Because
they know a lot about the salaries in the industry. Yeah. And the other thing I would say about that,
too, is I want to be careful with this advice. Because if you're working in a very conservative
industry, this might be harder to do. But you should be able to talk with your colleagues in
your current job about what you're making. And that can be very scary. But it's a good way to
get information. And I think, you know, the workplace is changing a lot. One of the positive
things is, I think, more transparency. But if you have people that you work with in your same
discipline that you trust, I'd encourage you to do that even where you are right now.
And, again, I've worked in a range of places. I think most places are kind of stopping this
practice. It used to be, like, oh, you cannot discuss salary. Which I think also keeps a lot
of people in the dark about what the real ranges are. Okay. I'm going to go to the next question.
How do you decide which technical skills are worth the time investment to really learn versus
having a passing acquaintance with? I think it would depend on your specific role. And whether
or not that is something that is needed for your job or for your growth. So I think about, for
example, going back to that list of that massively long list of different types of machine learning
tools and software and models and all these different kinds of things. In your particular
job, maybe you only need clustering. Like, they need somebody who's an expert at clustering. And
they need somebody who understands all the different ins and outs of a very few, you know,
a very small number of models. In that sense, you know, maybe it's worth the effort of really
digging in and understanding those. But the other side of that, obviously, is that what that does
is it keeps you in the expert role for where you are now or maybe with the team that you're
currently in. So another view of that would be to say, where do I want to go? What is the type of
job that I want to have and the type of career that I want to have for myself eventually?
When I answer that question for myself, I want to be not just the best data scientist at my
company. I want to be the best data scientist possible so that any company can look at me
and all the different types of experiences that I've had and say, wow, she really understands a
lot of different kinds of tools. She understands that, you know, AI, for example, that's the buzz
word of the day. And a lot of companies are interested in that. And so she's the person
that I would want to call because she has that type of expertise. So I would definitely challenge
you to think about your career and the path that you want to go on and figure out whether or not
some of these different types of tools will be useful. And some of that requires, you know,
reading in the literature, but also looking at different use cases to see how other people are
using it and the value that they're able to get from some of these different types of tools or
models. This question actually came up in a session I was in earlier. What is the difference
between a data analyst and data scientist in your experience? Is there a difference?
So in some companies, there is no distinction. It's more like a title. But like,
from my experience, data analyst is doing more, you know, querying the data, getting the data
from a database, let's say using SQL, creating reports, where data scientists go one step
further, where they also do the data cleaning, managing and querying the data, but also is
involved on the modeling itself. So that's my experience. But I think it's kind of like a gray
area. Like some companies, they call data analysts what I consider being a data scientist.
So and they have like different names. Yeah. Even more names than data analysts and data scientists.
Yeah. It's kind of, I mean, these are all squishy terms, you know. So I would, I guess maybe just
thinking about some of the different roles I've had, people who've had the data scientist role,
they tend to be, they tend to have a little bit more training, maybe a little bit more education,
like formal training in maybe like a math or statistics or physics or something like that.
They tend to, again, again, there's no hard, fast rule for any of these different types of things.
And they tend to have a little bit more expertise in some of the more advanced types of modeling
scenarios, whereas maybe a data analyst would be very proficient in some of the data engineering
tasks or like pulling different types of SQL queries and maybe creating some dashboards or
some reports. But the deeper insights of trying to understand, maybe starting with the question of
why is this, why are we losing so much money in this particular area of our company and this kind
of product in our company? When I think of a data scientist, I think of a scientist, right?
Where you actually have to start from the beginning. Nobody's handing you a CSV or telling
you specifically which types of data to look at or what types of models to use and so on.
You're starting from scratch and you're able to go through that entire scientific process
and figure out where your hypotheses are, testing those, maybe validating those,
maybe circling back and going back to the beginning. And so that entire process,
I would think of that as that person that has that type of holistic set of skills as a data
scientist as well. And one last thing is data scientists, they usually make much more money.
So if you are in doubt, if you should write in your resume that you are a data analyst,
a data scientist, go for data scientist. That's right.
It gets complicated because in some companies, there's like the official job title that's owned
by HR and then they'll let people make up business titles that say anything you want. So I've seen
cases of somebody gets hired as a business intelligence analyst and three weeks later,
they're a data scientist. You're like, wow, that was fast. Okay. So a good question here about
um, how do you handle being in a job with little or no mentorship opportunities?
I kind of touched on this earlier. Um, uh, there I've definitely been that, um,
how can I say it? I've been that person that has the, the, the set of skills,
that one particular set of skills that nobody else in the company has. So they literally cannot
speak to me about it, you know, on some kind of, not to say that I'm like inherently smarter than
them necessarily. Everybody has their own specialty, but maybe I'm the only one that
has studied this particular area. And so, um, I can't talk to them and that about those kinds
of topics. And so what I have to do is sort of create my own network. I have just in the course
of being, um, a person who's interested in developing my network in Dallas, for example,
I go to different events, I go to different talks and, you know, just talk to people and
find out what they're interested in. So then when I come up across some kind of problem and I just,
like, oh, I don't know what to do or, you know, where should I go next with this?
Oh, wait a minute. David knows this. You know, I, I know I see, he sounds like the kind of person
that would have that kind of expertise. Maybe I can tap him. Um, so that's one area where it's,
when you think about technical mentorship, but the other path would be just growth for your career,
right? So just figuring out, um, I want to be a director someday, or I want to be a technical
leader someday. How can I do that? Right. And so some of that is, um, just finding and finding
people who have gone through that path that you're trying to, to go through. And that could be within
your own company. That could be, you know, for people who work in similar types of roles as
you're trying to get into maybe who've been in different companies. Um, so trying to just be
creative about finding people, um, that can inspire you and the ways that you need.
That's great. Um, David, I'm going to direct this one to you. Um, can you recommend any good
Twitter accounts to follow to learn more about data? And are, you mentioned you'd, uh, highly
leveraged Twitter. What would you recommend? Um, well, if you're not already following Mara
Averick, that's probably the best place to start. Um, definitely where I think I've learned more
than anything. Um, geez, there's so many people how to, um, trying to think of some other ones
that have been particularly informative for me. I would say this isn't an account, but the,
um, and particularly when you're developing in data visualization, especially the tidy Tuesday
hashtag has been really helpful for me to see folks who are doing some really interesting
data visualization. Um, that's been a helpful one. Um, yeah, I think I'd probably start there.
Great. Anyone else have any thoughts?
What about the rstats hashtag?
Yeah, sorry. I assume that was, uh, but yes, rstats hashtag if you're not already following
that as well. The other thing actually, actually looking over at you for a second, Gabby,
makes me think that, um, I really like the rladies. Uh, we are rladies rotating curator, um,
because it's really fun to see kind of each week. It's a, it's a different person who curates the
account and it's really fun just to see the different types of work that people are doing
and the different packages they use. So I really like that account as well.
Great. Um, so this question is, uh, more about like R versus other things. So I'm fundamentally
a generalist in my overall skills and my R skills, breadth, not depth. Is that a viable way to build
a career or is specializing essential? For sure.
It's valid you're saying? Yeah.
No, like this person is saying that all they know it's R. They're saying they're a generalist
in their overall skills and their R skills. And they're wondering, um, is that a viable way to
build a career or should they be specializing within that? Either in data science or in R, I guess.
Well, I think, again, there is a broad of like jobs. So you can be a generalist or you can be
a very specific, it all depends. I think there is maybe you have a better opinion than I,
but I think there is space for everybody for being a generalist and to be a very like domain expert.
Right. So, um, and I think I touched on this a little bit in the beginning where I was thinking
about the different types of ways, um, to classify the different types of skills that are required
as part of a data scientist. And so I was saying, if I wanted to just be a person that a general
data science company would find attractive, then I would have proficiency in machine learning,
programming, and big data technologies. And as our esteemed panelists said earlier,
some of those companies might not necessarily care about some of those, right? So they might
not care about the big data, but they might not necessarily care about some of those.
Right. So they might not care about the big data part. Maybe they only care about the other two.
But when I think about it again, unless you've already decided specifically, I know that this
job in particular is what I want. And I know the specific set of skills that are required for that
job. And I'm just going to keep on honing those skills. Um, unless you're, unless you're doing
that, I would challenge you to branch out a little bit more, learn about other types of things,
but obviously don't, you don't want to get to the point where, um, you're just picking up every
single kind of tool, every different, every type of model or expertise. At some point, you're going
to have to specialize because the people who have very specific domain experience like baseball,
like, you know, telecommunications and so on, they really understand the data. So they can go
beyond just saying, I understand that this column seems to be related to this column. They really
understand all the different ways that, um, that extra knowledge can inform how well you can get
some insights from some of those different types of projects. So, um, I would encourage you for
your specific area. You know, once you've actually determined that there's a specific area that is
of interest to you, that you learn, you take the time to develop that domain experience. And, um,
the good thing about it is that if you get into it and you realize, eh, I kind of thought I would
like this, but I don't like it so much, right? Then you can get experience in something else,
right? So you just, um, yeah, just try different, different things. But I definitely would encourage
you to have some type of specialization in some, some areas. Great. Um, we have a couple of
questions sort of in this topic area about how you have dealt with being perhaps the only or first
woman or person of color in your organization or team. Do you have any advice for people who might
be, in addition to trying to get into data science, also dealing with, um, issues in that area?
So I have been in that scenario from the woman and also the person of color scenario
in so many of the roles that I've been in. Actually, I want to say every role that I've been
in. Um, and, uh, yeah. And so, um, some, one of the things that happens commonly is that, um, as
the one person, you feel like you have to be the representative, right? If I mess up, then now all
black people mess up, right? You know, that's just how we are. All women mess up, right? So some things
you just kind of have to forgive yourself and realize that you're human just like everybody
else. You make mistakes just like everybody else and just, you know, take those as growing
opportunities to get better. Um, but some of, some of the challenges are external, some of them
are internal. So I definitely would just encourage you to, you know, realize, you know, yeah, I'm a
good person too. I'm very smart and, you know, I have a lot of great ideas and good things to offer.
And, um, so just kind of keep that in mind as you're growing in your career.
Yeah. Also, like, don't feel like you have to be the one responsible. Like, let's say,
uh, there is no diversity efforts and then you are going to be the one doing the whole work
because, so like try to get other people to help you as well to have allies. And also the outside
network is very important on those times. So you don't feel lonely. So we have this support
around you that keeps you going. Great. Um, so I mean, all of you had such different paths. Um,
but we have a question here about for a young data scientist trying to get their first job,
should they be looking at large companies or startups? Do you have any specific advice about
what context might be the best place to start? So I came, so I always worked for startups until
moving to IBM two years ago, almost two years ago. So I went from a company where we were 20 people
to like 300,000. Uh, it's a big jump. I don't know what is better. I think if you are a beginner,
the best company is the company where you're going, again, you are going to have support
mentorship because it's so hard to break into this, you know, career without having someone
mentoring you. So if there is a startup that you have a good network and support, yeah, go for it.
But if you have opportunity to work for a big company, you probably have more mentorship,
but also like you are going to be more specialized than a startup where you do,
you have to do everything from getting the data, cleaning the data, data engineering to modeling
and putting production, for example. Can I also just give a pitch for the idea of potentially
considering consulting? Um, because I think it's a really good way that you can gain experience.
And, um, you know, even if your ultimate goal is to become, say a data scientist,
I think there are a lot of opportunities to use the types of skills that you have as an R user.
You know, outside of that, that title, um, in ways that can really be impactful for the
organizations that you work for. I mean, just as a, as a minor example, um, one of the clients
that I was training recently, um, was working, doing an evaluation of, um, an afterschool program
and they were working at a hundred different schools and they had to produce literally a
hundred reports. I taught them about parameterized reporting and it just like completely blew their
mind. The idea that they could, you know, automate that and not have to manually produce
a hundred reports. They're not a data science firm that, you know, that's not how they identify
themselves, but those types of skills can, can be really useful and serve a wide variety of
organizations. Um, and you can do that sometimes through consulting. I actually have a follow-up
question directed to you, David, on that point, which is how did you get started consulting?
How did you start out finding clients and how has that changed over time?
Um, so I started out consulting, um, the honest answer is because I had twins three and a half
years ago and I wanted more flexibility, um, than in the job that I had at the time. Um, I started
out finding clients. I've mostly done online marketing. Um, I, I offer online courses as well
as trainings for organizations. Um, and, um, I've tried to basically become a resource for,
for other folks. So I write a lot of blog posts, really pitched it like newcomers,
you know, learning about packages to make, um, effective tables or that type of thing.
And that's really been my most effective strategy to reach out to clients.
That's great. So I think we're right at time. Um, so I'd love to give a round of applause
to the panelists.
Thank you.